Evaluating the Safety of NYC Rail Transit

Aishwarya Srivastava
NYU, Courant Institute of Mathematical Science
New York City, US
as12588@nyu.edu
Abstract —
Analyze the safety of New York City public rail transit by
investigating the link between crime and rail station proximity.
Proximity to rail stations was measured by calculating which
subway station was closest to the crime, as well as how far it was
from the crime.
Keywords- Analytics, New York City, Crime, Public Transit,
Safety
I. INTRODUCTION
We analyzed the safety of New York City public rail
transit by investigating the link between crime incidence and
rail stations. We determined a crime’s proximity to a rail
station by using equirectangular approximation; we calculated
the distance from each crime to each rail station to determine
which station was the closest to the crime as well as its total
distance in meters from the crime.
II. MOTIVATION
Millions of residents, commuters, and tourists ride the
NYC subway every day; most individuals have no choice but
to use the public transit system as car travel and private or
shared ride options can be cost prohibitive. Understanding the
safety of the public transit system is critical.
Commuters and visitors want to travel safely and feel
secure that they will not become a victim of a crime while
using public transit. Having data showing that NYC rail
systems are safe would give riders security. Furthermore,
such data could be useful to the City of New York to publish
to help promote tourism and business in the area.
In the case of specific stations that are not safe, the data
would be useful to the NYPD. With the knowledge of
specific stations with higher than average crime incidence,
they could consider adding additional police presence or using
other techniques to combat crime.
III. RELATED WORK
The first related work we examined prior to beginning our
project regarded the effect rail station openings had on crime
in Los Angeles[1]. While our motivation was slightly
different and concerned the general level of safety of public
transit, the underlying goal was the same; to examine the
potential link between public rail transit and crime.
To investigate this link the authors compared crime
statistics from the Los Angeles Police Department with rail
station opening data from the Los Angeles Metro website.
Additionally, they examined the short-term impact two transit
labor strikes that were approximately 1 month each had on
crime to evaluate whether there was any notable short-term
effect on crime. Because Los Angeles has many areas that are
not well-connected to the transit system, only areas within 1
kilometer of a transit station were considered for the study.
The data was modeled in several rounds and significance tests
were performed.
Ultimately the authors found that the data did not prove
that transit station openings in Los Angeles impacted crime
using industry-standard statistical significance tests. One
notable difference between this study and ours, however, was
that the Los Angeles study was limited to less granular data at
the Reporting District (RD) level, which are the Los Angeles
Police Department’s neighborhood area designations. The
authors themselves noted in their future work section that
while they could not establish a link between transit stations
and crime, they were limited by the available data and that
perhaps more granular crime location data would establish a
link. For our New York City study, we did have precise crime
location data in the form of Latitude and Longitude
coordinates, and we were not investigating differences in
crime before and after station openings but examining the
relationship between crimes and subway station proximity.
The second related paper we examined was Big data
analytics for security and criminal investigations[2] which
proposed a framework to manage big data under the context of
criminal investigation.
For big data analytics, some modules are common for
every task of a problem domain. For instance, big data
extraction, big data transformation, big data integration, big
data analysis are among the common modules of a big data
analytics system. On the other hand, data sources, methods,
and applications are mainly domain-specific. In the proposed
framework, the authors adopted the R-P (relational-positional)
model that classifies the activities of criminal investigation
under two broad perspectives namely, relation and position.
There were four major steps in the proposed framework. For
the first step, data are collected from multiple sources, and
then various big data tools and techniques are applied to
transform data from a raw format to a suitable format for
subsequent analysis. For the third step, various analytical
methods are applied to discover criminal knowledge from the
pre-processed data. Finally, the automatically discovered
criminal knowledge (e.g., criminal network) is applied to
support criminal investigations.
The conclusion was; as the volume of data is increasing
continuously, classical techniques may not be efficient enough
to process all available data in a timely manner. Thus, the
selection of proper data sources is necessary for managing
security intelligence. They would need selection of
appropriate analytical models. For big data analytics, there are
numerous data analytical methods in which some methods are
more suitable for certain investigation purposes and datasets.
Consistent with the HACE theorem, big data also introduce
some new challenges such as non-uniform data circulation
and distributed manipulation with a large number of variables
that cannot be coped with by existing analytical methods.
Therefore, the project team needs to examine the
characteristics of different analytical models, and match the
most appropriate methods with the specific nature of the
investigation domains. Proper matching between techniques
and methodologies are required for effective and efficient
investigative actions. Another issue was tackling the variety of
data formats from multiple data sources. Owing to various
structures, quality, granularity, and objectives of
investigations, data collection and analysis methods tend to be
different. Accordingly, project teams should continuously
refine their frameworks, analytics techniques, and tools to
meet the evolving characteristics of investigations, and the
emerging formats of criminal data generating from possibly
new data sources.
III. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
A. Design Details
We downloaded our datasets from the web and then
uploaded them into HDFS. We carried out our data profiling
and cleaning using MapReduce jobs. We then used Impala
queries on our cleaned datasets to find which station was
closest to each crime as well as the station’s distance in meters
from the crime. This generated a lookup table of each crime’s
ID, the distance in meters from its closest station, and the ID
of the station which was closest. We used this lookup table to
create a final merged dataset of crimes and rail stations.
Finally, we ran additional analytics on this merged dataset
using Impala.
B. Description of Datasets
The public rail transit station data primarily came from
NYC Open Data, which is a free public data source containing
data from New York City Agencies. Three related datasets
were used; Metropolitan Transit Authority (MTA) subway
stations [3], Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH) stations
[4], and Staten Island Railway stations [5] in New York City.
In total the three datasets contained a total of 500 stations.
The data contained fields such as distinct station keys, station
names, lat/long coordinates of the station, and the line the
subway was a part of.
The crime data [6] was also sourced from NYC Open
Data. This dataset includes all valid felony, misdemeanor, and
violation and various other crimes reported to the New York
City Police Department (NYPD) from 2010-present. The
dataset included 36 distinct features such as ID, borough, date,
crime description, whether the crime was successfully
completed vs. attempted, and lat/long coordinates.
IV. RESULTS
The crime data contained a “station name” field that
according to NYC Open Data’s notes on the dataset was
supposed to designate the name of the transit station for
crimes that occured at a transit station. In reality however this
field was unreliable. In most cases this field had a value
which was unexpected as through sanity checks it was simply
not possible that the number of fields that contained a station
value occurred at rail stations. Investigating the values
themselves the station name often did align with the closest
subway station that we had determined, but we confirmed
even in cases where the crime’s lat/long coordinates were far
from a station, that the station name field could still have a
value. Furthermore, we saw other types of stations in the data
such as police stations. Thus we did not do any analysis on
crime that specifically occurred on subways. So, we focused
solely on crime incidence proximity to rail stations.
To determine a crime’s proximity to a subway station, we
used equirectangular approximation to calculate the distance
from each crime to each rail station using a SQL cross join
which generated approximately 3.25 billion records. We then
used this information to determine which subway station was
the closest to the crime, as well as the distance in meters the
crime occured from that station.
Our initial findings for Staten Island specifically had
extremely large distances between crime and station. After
doing some research this made perfect sense; the MTA and
PATH stations are not connected to Staten Island. We
resolved this issue by augmenting our dataset with Station
Island Railway stations and recalculating our crime to station
distances. While Staten Island still had the largest average
distance between station and crime of all Boroughs, this
reduced the distances by about 75% and gave us much more
reasonable metrics for Staten Island.
We found that crimes are slightly less likely to be
successfully completed (vs. attempted) very close to a transit
station (~1 block) compared to further distances (1+ avenues).
This result was not surprising. Transit stations are busy hubs
used by millions of people each day, and attempted crime in
such areas is more likely to be thwarted by bystanders. The
difference in completed crime percentages close to a subway
vs. further away was extremely small, but did exist. Overall
completed crimes made up 97%+ of our dataset, and there
were not many recorded incidents of attempted crimes that
were not successfully completed. We suspected the actual
number was higher, but that in many cases perhaps individuals
did not bother to report the incident with the NYPD.
We found that some types of crimes were more likely than
others to occur closer to a transit station than others. Theft of
services (stealing services such as those offered by a
restaurant, club, taxi, subway), Fraudulent Accosting (intent to
defraud of money or property by means of a trick, swindle or
confidence game), and Alcoholic Beverage Control Law
(attempting to sell alcoholic beverages without a license) [7]
were the top 3 offenses occurring closest to transit stations
across Boroughs.
Finally, we saw that Boroughs varied in the percentage of
crimes that occurred very close to a transit station. Over 50%
of Manhattan crimes occurred within 1 avenue of a transit
station (Brooklyn 26%, Bronx 25%, Queens 16%, Staten
Island 6%).
We reasoned that this result was likely due to the fact that
some Boroughs such as Manhattan are better connected via
rail stations and simply have more stations than others such as
Staten Island.
V. FUTURE WORK
In the future if the station name field in the crime data
could be properly cleaned, or if another dataset containing
data on crimes that occured on trains or at rail stations could
be obtained, we could generate more informative insights on
the safety of NYC rail transit by comparing rail crime to
overall crime incidence.
To measure the distance of a crime to the closest subway
station we used the shortest straight-line calculation from the
crime to the station. In reality, however, in an urban
environment the shortest line distance to a destination is not
possible to take due to the presence of buildings and other
obstacles, the actual walking distance from a given latitude
and longitude coordinate to the closest subway will be larger.
A more accurate way to measure distance from a crime to a
subway station would be to use the shortest distance to walk
via viable pedestrian paths, such as the recommended walking
paths presented by Google Maps.
The methodology we used to determine the distance of
each crime from its closest transit station has significant
applicability for other works outside of public safety analytics.
Given a specific latitude longitude coordinate, our code could
be used to find the closest restaurant, park, police station, or
any other location-based destination. For performance
reasons our analytic used equirectangular approximation to
calculate distance which is suitable for short distances, but is
more inaccurate for larger distances. In the case of a related
work analyzing larger distances, a switch to the more
computationally-intensive Haversine formula may be
advisable.
VI. CONCLUSION
While we were able to generate insights on the average
distance each crime occurred from a transit station, the
relationship between the two isn’t necessarily causal. Some
Boroughs could have more crime occurring near transit
stations simply because they have more of them.
Our finding that crimes were less likely to be completed
(vs. attempted) very close to a subway station does suggest
that there is indeed a link between crime and subway station
proximity. In future work it may be advisable to find a way to
analyze crimes occurring on trains or at railway stations to
compare the percent of crimes at these locations compared to
overall crime, and compare to the distance insights we
generated.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to Professor Suzanne McIntosh for her
extended support and for providing us with an opportunity to
work on this project.
VIII. REFERENCES
1. Greg Ridgeway and John M. MacDonald. Effect of Rail
Transit on Crime: A Study of Los Angeles from 1988 to
2014. Springer Science+Business Media New York 2016.
20 April 2016.
2. M.I. Pramanik Raymond Y.K. Lau Wei T. Yue Yunming
Ye Chunping Li Big data analytics for security and
criminalinvestigations
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/widm.12
08
3. NYC OpenData: Subway Stations. 2019 The City of New
York.
https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Transportation/Subway-Stat
ions/arq3-7z49
4. NYC OpenData: Path Station Locations. 2019 The City
of New York.
https://data.cityofnewyork.us/City-Government/Path-Stati
on-Locations/acxp-7ep7
5. Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia: List of Staten Island
Railway stations.
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_Staten
_Island_Railway_stations&oldid=865097069
6. NYC OpenData: NYPD Complaint Data Historic. 2019
The City of New York.
https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Public-Safety/NYPD-Comp
laint-Data-Historic/qgea-i56i
7. New York State Senate: Penal Code.
https://www.nysenate.gov/legislation/laws/PEN
